[...] because of the simple fact that you are human, you find yourself heir to an inherent unsatisfactoriness
in life that simply will not go away. You can supress it from your awareness for a time; you can distract
yourself for hours on end, but it always comes back, and usually when you least expect it. All of a sudden,
seemingly out of the blue, you sit up, take stock, and realize your actual situation in life.
--
Life seems to be a perpetual struggle, an enormous effort against staggering odds. And what is our solution to
all this dissatisfaction? We get stuck in the "if only" syndrome. If only I had more money, then I would
be happy. If only I could find somebody who really loved me; if only I could lose twenty pounds; if only [...]
--
[change] is the nature of the universe. But human culture has taught some odd responses to this endless
flowing. We categorize experiences. We try to stick each perception, every mental change in this
endless flow, into one of three mental pigeon holes: it is good, bar, or neutral. Then, according to which box
we stick it in, we perceive with a set of fixed habitual mental responses.
--
In our society, we are great believers in education. We believe that knowledge makes a person civilized.
Civilization, however, polishes a person only superficially. Subject our noble and sophisticated gentleperson
to the stresses of war or economic collapse, and see what happens. It is one thing to obey the law because
you know the penalties and fear the consequences; it is something else entirely to obey the law because you
have cleansed yourself from the greed that would make you steal and the hatred that would make you kill.
--
Meditation is called the Great Teacher. It is the cleansing crucible fire that works slowly but surely,
through understanding. The greater your understanding, the more flexible and tolerant, the more compassionate
you can be. You become like a perfect parent or an ideal teacher. You are ready to forgive and forget. You feel love
toward others because you understand them, and you understand others because you have understood yourself.